doc: http metrics path normalization (#4155)
dapr/docs: daprdocs/content/en/operations/observability/metrics/metrics-overview.md

    enabled: false
```

## Optimizing HTTP metrics reporting with path matching

> When invoking Dapr using HTTP metrics are created for each requested method by default. This can result in a high number of metrics, known as high cardinality, which can impact memory usage and CPU.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When invoking Dapr using HTTP, metrics are created for each requested method by default. This can result in a high number of metrics, known as high cardinality, which can impact memory usage and CPU.
```

Path matching allows you to manage and control the cardinality of HTTP metrics in Dapr. This is an aggregation of metrics, so rather than having a metric for each event, you can reduce the number of metrics events and report an overall number.  For details on how to set the cardinality in configuration see ({{< ref "configuration-overview.md#metrics" >}})  

This configuration is opt-in and is enabled via the Dapr configuration `spec.metrics.http.pathMatching`. When defined, it enables path matching, which standardizes specified paths for both metrics paths. This reduces the number of unique metrics paths, making metrics more manageable and reducing resource consumption in a controlled way.  

When `spec.metrics.http.pathMatching` is combined with the `increasedCardinality` flag set to `false`, non-matched paths are transformed into a catch-all bucket to control and limit cardinality, preventing unbounded path growth. Conversely, when `increasedCardinality` is `true` (the default), non-matched paths are passed through as they normally would be, allowing for potentially higher cardinality but preserving the original path data. 

### Examples of Path Matching in HTTP Metrics

> Here are some examples demonstrating how to use the Path Matching API in Dapr for managing HTTP metrics. On each example we have the metrics collected from 5 HTTP requests to the `/orders` endpoint with different order IDs. By adjusting cardinality and utilizing path matching, you can fine-tune metric granularity to balance detail and resource efficiency.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following examples demonstrate how to use the Path Matching API in Dapr for managing HTTP metrics. On each example, the metrics are collected from 5 HTTP requests to the `/orders` endpoint with different order IDs. By adjusting cardinality and utilizing path matching, you can fine-tune metric granularity to balance detail and resource efficiency.
```

> These examples illustrate the cardinality of the metrics, highlighting that high cardinality configurations result in many entries, which correspond to higher memory usage for handling metrics. For simplicity, we will focus on a single metric: `dapr_http_server_request_count`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These examples illustrate the cardinality of the metrics, highlighting that high cardinality configurations result in many entries, which correspond to higher memory usage for handling metrics. For simplicity, the following example focuses on a single metric: `dapr_http_server_request_count`. 
```

#### Low cardinality with path matching (Recommendation)

Configuration:
```yaml
http:
  increasedCardinality: false
  pathMatching:
    - /orders/{orderID}
```

Metrics generated:
```
# matched paths
dapr_http_server_request_count{app_id="order-service",method="GET",path="/orders/{orderID}",status="200"} 5
# unmatched paths
dapr_http_server_request_count{app_id="order-service",method="GET",path="",status="200"} 1
```

> With low cardinality and path matching configured, we get the best of both worlds by grouping the metrics for the important endpoints without compromising the cardinality. This approach helps avoid high memory usage and potential security issues.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With low cardinality and path matching configured, you get the best of both worlds by grouping the metrics for the important endpoints without compromising the cardinality. This approach helps avoid high memory usage and potential security issues.
```

#### Low cardinality without path matching

Configuration:

```yaml
http:
  increasedCardinality: false
```
Metrics generated:
```
dapr_http_server_request_count{app_id="order-service",method="GET", path="",status="200"} 5
```

In low cardinality mode, the path, which is the main source of unbounded cardinality, is dropped. This results in metrics that primarily indicate the number of requests made to the service for a given HTTP method, but without any information about the paths invoked. 

#### High cardinality with path matching

Configuration:
```yaml
http:
  increasedCardinality: true
  pathMatching:
    - /orders/{orderID}
```

Metrics generated:
```
dapr_http_server_request_count{app_id="order-service",method="GET",path="/orders/{orderID}",status="200"} 5
```

> This example results from the same HTTP requests as the example above, but with path matching configured for the path `/orders/{orderID}`. By using path matching, we achieve reduced cardinality by grouping the metrics based on the matched path.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example results from the same HTTP requests as the example above, but with path matching configured for the path `/orders/{orderID}`. By using path matching, you achieve reduced cardinality by grouping the metrics based on the matched path.
```

#### High Cardinality without path matching

Configuration:
```yaml
http:
  increasedCardinality: true
```

Metrics generated:
```
dapr_http_server_request_count{app_id="order-service",method="GET",path="/orders/1",status="200"} 1
dapr_http_server_request_count{app_id="order-service",method="GET",path="/orders/2",status="200"} 1
dapr_http_server_request_count{app_id="order-service",method="GET",path="/orders/3",status="200"} 1
dapr_http_server_request_count{app_id="order-service",method="GET",path="/orders/4",status="200"} 1
dapr_http_server_request_count{app_id="order-service",method="GET",path="/orders/5",status="200"} 1
```

For each request, a new metric is created with the request path. This process continues for every request made to a new order ID, resulting in unbounded cardinality since the IDs are ever-growing.

### HTTP metrics exclude verbs

The `excludeVerbs` option allows you to exclude specific HTTP verbs from being reported in the metrics. This can be useful in high-performance applications where memory savings are critical.

### Examples of excluding HTTP verbs in metrics

> Here are some examples demonstrating how to exclude HTTP verbs in Dapr for managing HTTP metrics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following examples demonstrate how to exclude HTTP verbs in Dapr for managing HTTP metrics.
```

> Setting `spec.metrics.http.increasedCardinality` to `false` is **recommended** to all Dapr users, to reduce resource consumption. The pre-1.13 behavior, which is used when the option is `true`, is considered legacy and is only maintained for users who have special requirements around backwards-compatibility.

Reviewer 2: Do we still want to say these words, that this is consider legacy?

Author: should we invert the wording? Something like:

Starting with version 1.14, the default setting for spec.metrics.http.increasedCardinality is false to reduce resource consumption. The previous behavior, where this option is set to true, is considered legacy and is maintained only for users with specific backward-compatibility requirements.

## HTTP Metrics Path Normalization 

> Path normalization allows you to manage and control the cardinality of HTTP metrics in Dapr.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Path normalization allows you to manage and control the cardinality of HTTP metrics in Dapr. For details on how to set the cardinality in configuration see ({{< ref "configuration-overview.md#metrics" >}})
```

> This new configuration is opt-in and can be enabled with a new option for the Dapr Configuration resource `spec.metrics.http.pathNormalization.enabled`. When set to `true`, it enables path normalization, which standardizes specified paths for both ingress and egress paths. This reduces the number of unique metrics paths, making metrics more manageable and reducing resource consumption in a controlled way.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This configuration is opt-in and is enabled via the Dapr configuration `spec.metrics.http.pathNormalization.enabled` setting. When set to `true`, it enables path normalization, which standardizes specified paths for both ingress and egress paths. This reduces the number of unique metrics paths, making metrics more manageable and reducing resource consumption in a controlled way.
```

Reviewer 2: It would be good to have some clear guidance here on what is best to do. I presume the best guidance is to add path normalization to true in order to get metrics showing correctly, is that right

Author: added some examples on configuration and the impact on the metrics!

> When combined with the `increasedCardinality` flag set to `false` (default in 1.14), non-matched paths are transformed into a catch-all bucket to control and limit cardinality, preventing unbounded path growth. Conversely, when `increasedCardinality` is `true`, non-matched paths are passed through as they normally would be, allowing for potentially higher cardinality but preserving the original path data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When `spec.metrics.http.pathNormalization.enabled` is combined with the `increasedCardinality` flag set to `false` (which is the default in v1.14), non-matched paths are transformed into a catch-all bucket to control and limit cardinality, preventing unbounded path growth. Conversely, when `increasedCardinality` is `true`, non-matched paths are passed through as they normally would be, allowing for potentially higher cardinality but preserving the original path data.
```

> Setting `spec.metrics.http.increasedCardinality` to `false` is **recommended** to all Dapr users, to reduce resource consumption. The pre-1.13 behavior, which is used when the option is `true`, is considered legacy and is only maintained for users who have special requirements around backwards-compatibility.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Setting `spec.metrics.http.increasedCardinality` to `false` is **recommended** to reduce resource consumption especially when the number of applications and their endpoints grow in number.
```

> ## HTTP Metrics Path Matching 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## HTTP metrics path matching 
```

> Path matching allows you to manage and control the cardinality of HTTP metrics in Dapr. For details on how to set the cardinality in configuration see ({{< ref "configuration-overview.md#metrics" >}})  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Path matching allows you to manage and control the cardinality of HTTP metrics in Dapr. This is an aggregation of metrics, so rather than having a metric for each event, you can reduce the number of metrics events and report an overall number.  For details on how to set the cardinality in configuration see ({{< ref "configuration-overview.md#metrics" >}})  
```

This configuration is opt-in and is enabled via the Dapr configuration `spec.metrics.http.pathMatching`. When defined, it enables path matching, which standardizes specified paths for both metrics paths. This reduces the number of unique metrics paths, making metrics more manageable and reducing resource consumption in a controlled way.  

> When `spec.metrics.http.pathMatching` is combined with the `increasedCardinality` flag set to `false` (which is the default in v1.14), non-matched paths are transformed into a catch-all bucket to control and limit cardinality, preventing unbounded path growth. Conversely, when `increasedCardinality` is `true`, non-matched paths are passed through as they normally would be, allowing for potentially higher cardinality but preserving the original path data. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When `spec.metrics.http.pathMatching` is combined with the `increasedCardinality` flag set to `false`, non-matched paths are transformed into a catch-all bucket to control and limit cardinality, preventing unbounded path growth. Conversely, when `increasedCardinality` is `true` (the default), non-matched paths are passed through as they normally would be, allowing for potentially higher cardinality but preserving the original path data. 
```

### Examples of Path Matching in HTTP Metrics

Here are some examples demonstrating how to use the Path Matching API in Dapr for managing HTTP metrics. These examples illustrate the effects of different configurations on the `dapr_http_server_request_count` metric, showcasing combinations of low and high cardinality, with and without path matching.

> - Low Cardinality Without Path Matching

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Low cardinality without path matching
```

Configuration:

```yaml
http:
  increasedCardinality: false
```

> Metrics:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Metrics generated:
```

```
dapr_http_server_request_count{app_id="order-service",method="GET", path="",status="200"} 5
```

> - Low Cardinality With Path Matching

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Low cardinality with path matching
```

Configuration:
```yaml
http:
  increasedCardinality: false
  pathMatching:
    - /orders/{orderID}
```

> Metrics:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Metrics generated:
```

```
# matched paths
dapr_http_server_request_count{app_id="order-service",method="GET",path="/orders/{orderID}",status="200"} 4
# unmatched paths
dapr_http_server_request_count{app_id="order-service",method="GET",path="",status="200"} 1
```

> - High Cardinality Without Path Matching

Reviewer 2: I would put this example first, to show all the events that you get. The rest are then aggregated views on this example.

```suggestion
- High cardinality without path matching
```

Configuration:
```yaml
http:
  increasedCardinality: true
```

> Metrics:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Metrics generated:
```

```
dapr_http_server_request_count{app_id="order-service",method="GET",path="/orders/1234",status="200"} 1
dapr_http_server_request_count{app_id="order-service",method="GET",path="/orders/12345",status="200"} 1
dapr_http_server_request_count{app_id="order-service",method="GET",path="/orders/123456",status="200"} 1
dapr_http_server_request_count{app_id="order-service",method="GET",path="/orders/1234567",status="200"} 1
```

> - High Cardinality With Path Matching

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- High cardinality with path matching
```

Reviewer 2: I would put this example second, after the one above.

Configuration:
```yaml
http:
  increasedCardinality: true
  pathMatching:
    - /orders/{orderID}
```

> Metrics:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Metrics generated:
```

Reviewer 2: It would be really good to have a sentence to explain what is happening in each of these examples, why is there a since count of 1 and another of 5? I am not sure how these number come about as a result of the first high cardinality example.

Author: added one for each example :)

```
dapr_http_server_request_count{app_id="order-service",method="POST",path="/orders",status="200"} 1
dapr_http_server_request_count{app_id="order-service",method="GET",path="/orders/{orderID}",status="200"} 5
```

> These examples highlight how path matching can significantly influence the granularity and manageability of your HTTP metrics in Dapr.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These examples highlight how path matching can significantly the granularity and manageability of your HTTP metrics in Dapr.
```

When `spec.metrics.http.pathMatching` is combined with the `increasedCardinality` flag set to `false` (which is the default in v1.14), non-matched paths are transformed into a catch-all bucket to control and limit cardinality, preventing unbounded path growth. Conversely, when `increasedCardinality` is `true`, non-matched paths are passed through as they normally would be, allowing for potentially higher cardinality but preserving the original path data. 

### Examples of Path Matching in HTTP Metrics

Here are some examples demonstrating how to use the Path Matching API in Dapr for managing HTTP metrics. These examples illustrate the effects of different configurations on the `dapr_http_server_request_count` metric, showcasing combinations of low and high cardinality, with and without path matching.

- Low Cardinality Without Path Matching

Configuration:

```yaml
http:
  increasedCardinality: false
```

Metrics:
```

> dapr_http_server_request_count{app_id="order-service",method="InvokeService/order-service",status="200"} 5

Reviewer 3: Where is the HTTP verb here?

Author: we don't have verbs today with low cardinality

Reviewer 3: Please, update it since we now have a PR to add it.

```

- Low Cardinality With Path Matching

Configuration:
```yaml
http:
  increasedCardinality: false
  pathMatching:
    ingress:
    - /orders/{orderID}
    egress:
    - /orders/{orderID}
```

Metrics:
```
# matched paths
dapr_http_server_request_count{app_id="order-service",method="GET",path="/orders/{orderID}",status="200"} 4
# unmatched paths

> dapr_http_server_request_count{app_id="order-service",method="GET",path="/",status="200"} 1

Reviewer 3: Is this true? "/" does not match any path.

Author: that's the catch-all path, that was one of the last asks in the path matching implementation

Reviewer 3: As we discussed, this will be empty string for path-not-match.
